content/posts/tale-of-two-sonics/index.md, before:

---
date: '2025-06-20T16:48:14-04:00'
title: 'A Tale of Two Sonics'
draft: true
---

![A gif of a kid's ice cream flying sideways off the cone for no reason.](icecream.gif)

When I saw the first Sonic movie, it was out of morbid curiosity. Surely there was no way the studio could have salvaged what was sure to be a trainwreck, another cash-grab live action film preying on nostalgia with no meaningful substance to speak of.

Boy, was I wrong.

The first movie wasn't perfect. It had a few too many dated jokes and Fortnite dances. It was a little generic. But it wasn't remotely *bad*. It was, in fact, a somewhat touching tale about a blue alien finding a family in a faraway land, and learning to stop running (lol) and stand up to protect what was important to him. Classic shonen manga stuff.

Sonic 2 built on this and reached new heights. While still not perfect, with some minor pacing issues, it reached new levels of emotional resonance and cinematic fight scene special effects glory.

Sonic 3 was a string of bad, loosely-connected jokes and fanservice bone-throws.

## Plot Structure

(A detailed side-by-side scene-by-scene breakdown of each film in table form will go here)

### Sonic 2 Plot Analysis

### Sonic 3 Plot Analysis

## Narrative Continuity

### Following Through on Post-Credits Scenes

### The Inexplicable Degradation of Eggman

### The Inexcusable Degradation of Stone

### The Blatant Disrespect to the Knuckles Miniseries

## Jim Carrey

### Dancing

### CGI Cybernetic Insect Augmentations?

## Post-Credits Scenes

## Revision History

- 2025-06-20: Rough outline
- 2025-06-21: Ice cream gif

Commit message:

tiny bit of progress on sonic

content/posts/tale-of-two-sonics/index.md, after:

---
date: '2025-06-20T16:48:14-04:00'
title: 'A Tale of Two Sonics'
draft: true
---

![A gif of a kid's ice cream flying sideways off the cone for no reason.](icecream.gif)

When I saw the first Sonic movie, it was out of morbid curiosity. Surely there was no way the studio could have salvaged what was sure to be a trainwreck, another cash-grab live action film preying on nostalgia with no meaningful substance to speak of.

Boy, was I wrong.

The first movie wasn't perfect. It had a few too many dated jokes and Fortnite dances. It was a little generic. But it wasn't remotely *bad*. It was, in fact, a somewhat touching tale about a blue alien finding a family in a faraway land, and learning to stop running (lol) and stand up to protect what was important to him. Classic shonen manga stuff.

Sonic 2 built on this and reached new heights. While still not perfect, with some minor pacing issues, it reached new levels of emotional resonance and cinematic fight scene special effects glory.

Sonic 3 was a string of bad, loosely-connected jokes and fanservice bone-throws.

## Plot Structure

(A detailed side-by-side scene-by-scene breakdown of each film in table form will go here)

### Sonic 2 Plot Analysis

### Sonic 3 Plot Analysis

## Narrative Continuity

### Following Through on Post-Credits Scenes

### The Inexplicable Degradation of Eggman

### The Inexcusable Degradation of Stone

### The Blatant Disrespect to the Knuckles Miniseries

## Jim Carrey

This section is likely to be divisive if the reviews on RottenTomatoes are any indication of public opinion, but Jim Carrey's performance in *Sonic 3* does the film a serious disservice, especially when compared to his performance in the previous film. Rather than contributing to the plot in any meaningful way, or at least being funny, many of Carrey's scenes in *Sonic 3* are senseless and seem designed to pacify infants *a la* *CoComelon* with a senses-dulling inundation of lights and sounds with no actual semantic content.

### Dancing

Both *Sonic 2* and *Sonic 3* have long dance scenes. In *Sonic 2*, the dance scene occurs in some sort of Russian pub at which Sonic and Tails stop on their quest to find the Master Macguffin. In *Sonic 3*, the dance scene occurs as the Robotniks are en route to the secret key to the not-Space-Colony-ARK underneath a highly-secure GUN facility for some reason(?). Admittedly, both plots are somewhat contrived, but that's not what this section is about.

Why does the dance scene in *Sonic 2* work, but the one in *Sonic 3* doesn't?

TK

### CGI Cybernetic Insect Augmentations?

## Post-Credits Scenes

## Revision History

- TK
