content/en/post/jews-jesus.md, before:

+++
date = '2025-06-17'
title = 'Jews and Jesus'
author = ["Evelyn Park"]
description = "What do Jews think about Jesus? Did Jews kill Jesus?"
type = "post"
draft = false
translationKey = "judaism"
coffee = 1
tags = ["judaism", "history"]
categories = ["judaism"]
stage = "seedling"
cover = 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a9/AlexGraffito.svg/800px-AlexGraffito.svg.png'
series = 'Judaism for Gentiles'
history = [
  {date = "2025-06-17", stage="seedling", author = "Evelyn Park", note = "Rough outline and Martin text"},
]
+++

## What Do Jews Think about Jesus?

### The Historical Jesus

A prerequisite question to consider is whether Jesus existed as a legitimate historical figure. Christians answer this question in a variety of ways, with more conservative or fundamentalist sects asserting definitively that, yes, Jesus was a real historical figure, and more liberal sects being more open to the possibility that he may not have been. Modern historical scholarship tends to side with the latter opinion.

The Gospel narratives are the strongest evidence for the existence of the historical Jesus, but there are a number of issues which prevent them from serving as definitive proof.

{{< epigraph pre="Martin, D. B. (2012). New Testament History and Literature. Yale University Press. " cite="https://doi.org/10.12987/9780300182194" link="Martin, D. B. (2012). New Testament History and Literature. Yale University Press. https://doi.org/10.12987/9780300182194" >}}
the New Testament contains contradictory historical accounts of various parts of early Christianity... The account of the birth of Jesus and the origins of his family provided by Matthew is totally different from that in Luke, and any harmonization cannot stand up to the standards of modern historiography. The different narratives of his resurrection appearances---who of his disciples claimed they had seen him, when, and where?---in Mark, Matthew, Luke, and Paul contradict one another. The New Testament is simply not a reliable source for the history of Jesus or early Christianity when taken at face value.
{{< /epigraph >}}

{{< figure
  src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5a/Alexamenos_graffito.jpg/960px-Alexamenos_graffito.jpg"
  class="class param"
  type="margin"
  title="Alexamenos graffiti."
  label="alexamenos"
  caption="Housed in the Pallatine Museum in Rome."
  attr="Wikimedia"
  attrlink="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5a/Alexamenos_graffito.jpg/960px-Alexamenos_graffito.jpg"
  alt="A photo of the Alexamenos graffiti."
 >}}
This is often the case with ancient historical sources. All sources are biased: the data a historian chooses to examine, the way they construct and present arguments, and the conclusions they draw are all interpretations the historian is making for the reader. Ancient writers and historians had no concept for historical accuracy in the modern sense; they were less concerned with preserving exact words, numbers, dates, and the like than they were with presenting an interpretation of events which would help the reader to make sense out of events.

We do much the same today. If a child asks how electricity works, we answer with an interpretation. "There is power in the walls, and that power can travel through these wires, and that makes machines work." We might say something about the movement of electrons. What we don't do is hand the child a physics textbook and a stack of electrical diagrams. The ancient writer, of course, had no electrical diagrams! The number of men in an army had to be counted and relayed to the historian's ear, quotes and dialog were written from memory or else made up in such a way as to most accurately convey the intended message, and so on.

Archeological evidence, that is contemporary material objects which have survived and been discovered and studied, is a different beast altogether. Pieces of pottery, statues, figurines, and graffiti do not often explain themselves. No historian or writer has preemptively interpreted them for us. It is up to the archeologist to examine material culture and figure out what an object meant, how it was used, or what social function it served.

Possibly the oldest verifiable archeological evidence of the historical Jesus is the Alexamenos graffiti, dated to ca. 200 CE, depicting a horse-headed figure hanging from a cross with the caption "Alexamenos worships his god".

{{< figure
  src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a9/AlexGraffito.svg/500px-AlexGraffito.svg.png"
  class="class param"
  title="Alexamenos graffiti."
  label="alexamenos-sketch"
  caption="Sketched to show details."
  attr="Lanciani, R. (2022). Ancient Rome in the Light of Recent Discoveries. Legare Street Press."
  attrlink="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a9/AlexGraffito.svg/500px-AlexGraffito.svg.png"
  alt="A sketch of the Alexamenos graffiti."
 >}}

This graffiti does less to prove that Jesus existed than it does to prove that the Jesus cult was active around 200 CE, over a century after Jesus's death.

We will save the analysis of the Gospel accounts for the next section. Right now, it's enough for us to say that there is not enough solid evidence to establish the existence of a historical Jesus of Nazareth.

### Rabbinic Period

### Today

Many articles written by Christian sources will assert that Jews reject Jesus as Messiah and deny his divinity. This phrasing is misleading; it makes it sound like rejecting and denying are things Jews are actively doing. In truth, most Jews don't go out of their way to think about Jesus in one way or another.

We do, however, live in a largely Christian society, and therefore must, by necessity, spend at least some time and mental effort distinguishing Judaism from the dominant Christian culture. This process is largely a matter of culture and identity, rather than one of religious belief. The average Jew does not celebrate Christmas, and, if asked "Why not?" will reply, "Because Jews don't believe in Jesus." This answer must, however, be prompted by a society in which the celebration of Christian is the cultural norm. Jews are perfectly happy celebrating our own religious festivals. I don't think about Christmas until somebody asks me why I don't celebrate it. It is this failure to assimilate into dominant Christian cultural practices that comes closest to the modern Jew's rejecting of Jesus.

Do Jews today view Jesus as divine? No. Not because we dislike Jesus, but because it would be idolatrous according to our interpretation of Torah. Do we accept him as Messiah? Also no. But this is not so unusual: we don't accept Sabbatai Zevi, Simon bar Kokhba, Moses of Crete, Abu Isa, Abraham ben Samuel Abulafia, or any number of other claimants either.

The short answer to the question, "What do Jews think about Jesus?" is, "We don't."

## Did the Jews Kill Jesus?

As discussed above, there is no consensus over whether Jesus was a real historical figure. For the sake of answering this question, we will treat the Gospel narratives as being more or less reliable historical accounts, and consider contemporary historical evidence to analyze the political forces at work in the crucifixion.

### Second Temple Politics

#### Pharisees, Sadducees, and Zealots

#### Rebellions Against Rome

### The Gospel Account

Most readers are likely familiar with the Gospels' accounts of the trial and crucifixion of Jesus. Jesus is arrested, brought before the chief priests and accused, then brought before Pilate and tried, and then crucified. The Gospels generally give rather detailed accounts of these events. This is surprising, because, in all likelihood, none of these events took place!

{{< epigraph pre="Martin, D. B. (2012). New Testament History and Literature. Yale University Press. " cite="https://doi.org/10.12987/9780300182194" link="https://doi.org/10.12987/9780300182194" >}}
Jesus was executed by crucifixion, which was a common method of torture and execution used by the Romans... So the execution of Jesus was a Roman affair, possibly with the cooperation of the Jewish leadership in Jerusalem. The Romans did not need to try a troublesome Jewish peasant in order to kill him. They tortured and crucified nameless lower-class people all the time. In order to get rid of Jesus, who had caused a disturbance in the temple, had made radical-sounding pronouncements and prophecies, and was rumored to have aspirations to kingship, the Romans would have simply taken him by force and crucified him the next day along with a few others they were getting rid of. There was no need for any trial, much less two or more before different "courts." It would have been more trouble than a Roman governor needed for the desired result.
{{< /epigraph >}}

Commit message:

added hillel and shammai example

content/en/post/jews-jesus.md, after:

+++
date = '2025-06-17'
title = 'Jews and Jesus'
author = ["Evelyn Park"]
description = "What do Jews think about Jesus? Did Jews kill Jesus?"
type = "post"
draft = false
translationKey = "judaism"
coffee = 1
tags = ["judaism", "history"]
categories = ["judaism"]
stage = "seedling"
cover = 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a9/AlexGraffito.svg/800px-AlexGraffito.svg.png'
series = 'Judaism for Gentiles'
history = [
  {date = "2025-06-17", stage="seedling", author = "Evelyn Park", note = "Rough outline and Martin text"},
]
+++

## What Do Jews Think about Jesus?

### The Historical Jesus

A prerequisite question to consider is whether Jesus existed as a legitimate historical figure. Christians answer this question in a variety of ways, with more conservative or fundamentalist sects asserting definitively that, yes, Jesus was a real historical figure, and more liberal sects being more open to the possibility that he may not have been. Modern historical scholarship tends to side with the latter opinion.

The Gospel narratives are the strongest evidence for the existence of the historical Jesus, but there are a number of issues which prevent them from serving as definitive proof.

{{< epigraph pre="Martin, D. B. (2012). New Testament History and Literature. Yale University Press. " cite="https://doi.org/10.12987/9780300182194" link="Martin, D. B. (2012). New Testament History and Literature. Yale University Press. https://doi.org/10.12987/9780300182194" >}}
the New Testament contains contradictory historical accounts of various parts of early Christianity... The account of the birth of Jesus and the origins of his family provided by Matthew is totally different from that in Luke, and any harmonization cannot stand up to the standards of modern historiography. The different narratives of his resurrection appearances---who of his disciples claimed they had seen him, when, and where?---in Mark, Matthew, Luke, and Paul contradict one another. The New Testament is simply not a reliable source for the history of Jesus or early Christianity when taken at face value.
{{< /epigraph >}}

{{< figure
  src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5a/Alexamenos_graffito.jpg/960px-Alexamenos_graffito.jpg"
  class="class param"
  type="margin"
  title="Alexamenos graffiti."
  label="alexamenos"
  caption="Housed in the Pallatine Museum in Rome."
  attr="Wikimedia"
  attrlink="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5a/Alexamenos_graffito.jpg/960px-Alexamenos_graffito.jpg"
  alt="A photo of the Alexamenos graffiti."
 >}}
This is often the case with ancient historical sources. All sources are biased: the data a historian chooses to examine, the way they construct and present arguments, and the conclusions they draw are all interpretations the historian is making for the reader. Ancient writers and historians had no concept for historical accuracy in the modern sense; they were less concerned with preserving exact words, numbers, dates, and the like than they were with presenting an interpretation of events which would help the reader to make sense out of events.

We do much the same today. If a child asks how electricity works, we answer with an interpretation. "There is power in the walls, and that power can travel through these wires, and that makes machines work." We might say something about the movement of electrons. What we don't do is hand the child a physics textbook and a stack of electrical diagrams. The ancient writer, of course, had no electrical diagrams! The number of men in an army had to be counted and relayed to the historian's ear, quotes and dialog were written from memory or else made up in such a way as to most accurately convey the intended message, and so on.

Archeological evidence, that is contemporary material objects which have survived and been discovered and studied, is a different beast altogether. Pieces of pottery, statues, figurines, and graffiti do not often explain themselves. No historian or writer has preemptively interpreted them for us. It is up to the archeologist to examine material culture and figure out what an object meant, how it was used, or what social function it served.

Possibly the oldest verifiable archeological evidence of the historical Jesus is the Alexamenos graffiti, dated to ca. 200 CE, depicting a horse-headed figure hanging from a cross with the caption "Alexamenos worships his god".

{{< figure
  src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a9/AlexGraffito.svg/500px-AlexGraffito.svg.png"
  class="class param"
  title="Alexamenos graffiti."
  label="alexamenos-sketch"
  caption="Sketched to show details."
  attr="Lanciani, R. (2022). Ancient Rome in the Light of Recent Discoveries. Legare Street Press."
  attrlink="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a9/AlexGraffito.svg/500px-AlexGraffito.svg.png"
  alt="A sketch of the Alexamenos graffiti."
 >}}

This graffiti does less to prove that Jesus existed than it does to prove that the Jesus cult was active around 200 CE, over a century after Jesus's death.

We will save the analysis of the Gospel accounts for the next section. Right now, it's enough for us to say that there is not enough solid evidence to establish the existence of a historical Jesus of Nazareth.

### Rabbinic Period

### Today

Many articles written by Christian sources will assert that Jews reject Jesus as Messiah and deny his divinity. This phrasing is misleading; it makes it sound like rejecting and denying are things Jews are actively doing. In truth, most Jews don't go out of their way to think about Jesus in one way or another.

We do, however, live in a largely Christian society, and therefore must, by necessity, spend at least some time and mental effort distinguishing Judaism from the dominant Christian culture. This process is largely a matter of culture and identity, rather than one of religious belief. The average Jew does not celebrate Christmas, and, if asked "Why not?" will reply, "Because Jews don't believe in Jesus." This answer must, however, be prompted by a society in which the celebration of Christian is the cultural norm. Jews are perfectly happy celebrating our own religious festivals. I don't think about Christmas until somebody asks me why I don't celebrate it. It is this failure to assimilate into dominant Christian cultural practices that comes closest to the modern Jew's rejecting of Jesus.

{{< marginpar >}}A completely arbitrary example. We don't really spend much time arguing about who we prefer, since we all agree that Hillel was usually right.{{< /marginpar >}}
In much the same way, the Christian reader would be unlikely to have an opinion on Hillel and Shammai. If we were to put the shoe on the other foot, and imagine that we lived in a predominantly Jewish culture, perhaps the reader would find it perplexing that everybody expects them to articulate their preference for one or the other. Imagine being asked in school by a classmate, "Do you side with the House of Hillel or the House of Shammai?" You would reply, "I don't know, I'm Christian and don't follow the Rabbis," and your classmate would be dumbfounded by your denial of *halakha* and rejection of the Rabbis.

Do Jews today view Jesus as divine? No. Not because we dislike Jesus, but because it would be idolatrous according to our interpretation of Torah. Do we accept him as Messiah? Also no. But this is not so unusual: we don't accept Sabbatai Zevi, Simon bar Kokhba, Moses of Crete, Abu Isa, Abraham ben Samuel Abulafia, or any number of other claimants either.

The short answer to the question, "What do Jews think about Jesus?" is, "We don't."

## Did the Jews Kill Jesus?

As discussed above, there is no consensus over whether Jesus was a real historical figure. For the sake of answering this question, we will treat the Gospel narratives as being more or less reliable historical accounts, and consider contemporary historical evidence to analyze the political forces at work in the crucifixion.

### Second Temple Politics

#### Pharisees, Sadducees, and Zealots

#### Rebellions Against Rome

### The Gospel Account

Most readers are likely familiar with the Gospels' accounts of the trial and crucifixion of Jesus. Jesus is arrested, brought before the chief priests and accused, then brought before Pilate and tried, and then crucified. The Gospels generally give rather detailed accounts of these events. This is surprising, because, in all likelihood, none of these events took place!

{{< epigraph pre="Martin, D. B. (2012). New Testament History and Literature. Yale University Press. " cite="https://doi.org/10.12987/9780300182194" link="https://doi.org/10.12987/9780300182194" >}}
Jesus was executed by crucifixion, which was a common method of torture and execution used by the Romans... So the execution of Jesus was a Roman affair, possibly with the cooperation of the Jewish leadership in Jerusalem. The Romans did not need to try a troublesome Jewish peasant in order to kill him. They tortured and crucified nameless lower-class people all the time. In order to get rid of Jesus, who had caused a disturbance in the temple, had made radical-sounding pronouncements and prophecies, and was rumored to have aspirations to kingship, the Romans would have simply taken him by force and crucified him the next day along with a few others they were getting rid of. There was no need for any trial, much less two or more before different "courts." It would have been more trouble than a Roman governor needed for the desired result.
{{< /epigraph >}}
